## TRANSCRIPTOMICS ANALYSIS
### BamToBigwigs
RNA samples from nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of AC16 and U2OS cells exposed to different temperature conditions were generated into libraries using the QuantSeq 3’ mRNA-Seq Library Prep Kit for Ion Torrent (Lexogen). Libraries were sequenced using the Ion Proton Sequencer and aligned to the hg19 human genome build or a combined dm6 (*D. melanogaster*) / hg19 genome build (for *D. melanogaster* cell spiked in samples) using the TMAP aligner with alignment settings (-tmap mapall stage1 map4) to generate bam files. Bam file reads were narrowed to their 3' nucleotide and converted to bigwig files using R scripts `bamfile_to_narrowed_bigwigs.R` and `bamfile_spikedin_to_narrowed_bigwigs.R`.

### Count Table Generation and Processing
Human polyA site (PAS) annotations were obtained from the Tian lab PolyA_DB 3 (http://exon.umdnj.edu/polya_db/v3) (Wang et al, 2018). Each PAS was extended 20 nt 3’ and 200 nt 5’ from the site of cleavage and those that overlapped on the same strand after extension were combined into a single PAS annotation: see GRanges object `reducedHumanPas.Rda`. 
D. melanogaster PASs were obtained from the Tian lab (Liu et al, 2017) and were extended, in the same way as for human PASs: see GRanges object `reducedFlyPas.Rda`.
Counts per PAS for each RNA-seq sample were obtained using bigwig files (from GEO (http://https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession code GSE137003) and R scripts `coldCountTableGeneration.R` and `countTableGenerationFly.R` to give `coldCountTableRaw.Rda` and `FlyCountTableRaw1.Rda`, respectively.

Raw count tables were processed to give:
1) Counts per Genes in RefSeq data base (counts from all PASs associated with each gene are summed) `coldRefSeqGeneCountTable.Rda`
2) Reads per million PAS-associated reads (RPM) normalized counts per PAS `coldPasForRefSeqGeneRPMCountTable.Rda`
3) Counts in reads per million per Genes in RefSeq data base (RPM-normalized counts from all PASs associated with each gene are summed) `coldRefSeqGeneRPMCountTable.Rda`



### 


Mapped reads were narrowed to their 3’ most nucleotide and those which overlapped with the extended PAS annotations were counted. Counts were then obtained for each gene by combining the counts for all PASs associated with each gene. Genes not in the RefSeq gene database were excluded.
For libraries prepared from D. melanogaster Schneider 2 (S2) cell spiked-in samples, reads were simultaneously aligned to both human and D. melanogaster genomes by aligning to a custom combined hg19 and dm6 genome build using the TMAP aligner. D. melanogaster PASs were obtained from the Tian lab (Liu et al, 2017) and were extended, in the same way as for human PASs. Mapped reads were narrowed to their 3’ most nucleotide and those which overlapped with the extended human or D. melanogaster PAS annotations were counted. The ratio of total D. melanogaster PAS to human PAS associated reads was obtained for each sample. These were then scaled relative to each other according to the ratio at which the two cell lines were combined.


### Fiji Macros

Fiji macros automate the counting of the number of dots corresponding to *REV-ERBα*, *CRY2* and *TP53* transcripts in the nucleus and cytoplasm of AC16 and U2OS cells exposed to 18°C for 5h or 24h and subsequent rewarming back to 37°C for 2h from deconvolved RNA-FISH images deposited at Image Data Resource (http://idr.openmicroscopy.org) under accession number idr0089.

### R scripts

R scripts process the Results.csv files generated by the Fiji macros to generate bar charts and statistical analyses presented in Fig. 4 and the source data file of the paper.

